# Manual of MitoZ.py

## About MitoZ.py
MitoZ.py is a Python3-based toolkit which aims to automatically filter pair-end raw data (fastq files), assemble genome, search for mitogenome sequences from the genome assembly result, annotate mitogenome (genbank file as result), and mitogenome visualization.


## System requirment

### Platform
MitoZ.py is developed and tested under `Linux version 2.6.32-696.el6.x86_64 (mockbuild@c1bm.rdu2.centos.org) (gcc version 4.4.7 20120313 (Red Hat 4.4.7-18) (GCC) ) #1 SMP Tue Mar 21 19:29:05 UTC 2017`. 

### Harddisk space
\>100G

###Memory
It takes ~100G when we tested MitoZ.py with `--thread_number 16`.
See `INSTALL.md` for installation instruction.


## Get started
MitoZ.py includes multiple functions, including `all`, `all2`, `filter`, `assemble`, `findmitoscaf`, `annotate` and `visualize`.

### Data requirement
#### Pair-end (PE) fastq files
e.g. `raw.1.fq.gz` and `raw.2.fq.gz` or `clean.1.fq.gz` and `clean.2.fq.gz`

The read length should be >= 71bp (PE71). Typically, I use data of PE100 or PE150 sequencing.

The length of read1 and read2 must be equal. You should trim your data (e.g. use the option `--keep_region` in `filter` function of MitoZ.py) before running MitoZ.py.

The insert size of pair-end library should be small insert size (<1000 bp). I do not recommend to use data of large insert size (>1000bp, mate-pair library), because this kind of data usually is not good as small insert size data.

About 3G base pair (bp) is enough for mitochondrial genome assembly.

#### Fasta file
When you annotate a mitogenome sequence(s) stored in fasta file, the sequence id can not be too long, or MitoZ.py will fail. This is for some limitation in BioPython that MitoZ.py invokes.

#### Genetic code
It is important to set a correct genetic code for MitoZ.py (`--genetic_code` option). Usually, arthropods use the invertebrate mitochondrial code (`--genetic_code 5`), and mammals use the vertebrate mitochondrial code (`--genetic_code 2`).Please refer to https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Utils/wprintgc.cgi for more details.

MitoZ.py use the genetic code for annotating the Protein coding genes (PCGs) of mitochondrial genome.

#### Taxa group
It is also important to set a correct taxa group for MitoZ.py (`--clade` option).

MitoZ.py use the `--clade` option to choose corresponding database (HMM modules, CM modules, protein reference sequences).

### 1 all

`all` function requires only two input pair-end fastq files, and outputs a genbank file containing mitochondrial genome sequences and annotation information.

#### 1.1 Input files
Pair-end(PE) fastq files (`raw.1.fq.gz` and `raw.2.fq.gz`), and optional files `1.adapter.list.gz` and `2.adapter.list.gz`.

#### 1.2 Example
`python3 MitoZ.py all --genetic_code 5 --clade Arthropoda --outprefix test \
--thread_number 12 \
--fastq1 raw.1.fq.gz \
--fastq2 raw.2.fq.gz \
--fastq_read_length 150 \
--insert_size 250  \
--run_mode 2 \
--filter_taxa_method 1 \
--requiring_taxa 'Arthropoda'`

For more details, please refer to `python3 MitoZ.py all -h`


### 2 all2

`all2` is amolst the same as `all`, except that `all2` doesn't filter the input fastq files.

#### 2.1 Input files
Pair-end(PE) fastq files (`clean.1.fq.gz` and `clean.2.fq.gz`).

#### 2.2 Example
`python3 MitoZ.py all --genetic_code 5 --clade Arthropoda --outprefix test \
--thread_number 8 \
--fastq1 clean.1.fq.gz \
--fastq2 clean.2.fq.gz \
--fastq_read_length 150 \
--insert_size 250 \
--run_mode 2 \
--filter_taxa_method 1 \
--requiring_taxa 'Arthropoda'`


### 3 filter

`filter` is to filter input raw fastq files (`raw.1.fq.gz` and `raw.2.fq.gz`), outputs clean fastq files (`clean.1.fq.gz` and `clean.2.fq.gz`)

#### 3.1 Input files
Pair-end(PE) fastq files (`raw.1.fq.gz` and `raw.2.fq.gz`), and optional files `1.adapter.list.gz` and `2.adapter.list.gz`.

#### 3.2 Example
`python3 MitoZ.py filter --fastq1 raw.1.fq.gz --fastq2 raw.2.fq.gz --fastq3 clean.1.fq.gz --fastq4 clean.2.fq.gz --outprefix test`


### 4 assemble

`assemble` is to assemble `clean.1.fq.gz` and `clean.2.fq.gz`, search for mitochondrial sequences from the assembly. Output is a mitochondrial sequence file in fasta format.

#### 4.1 Input files
Pair-end(PE) fastq files (`clean.1.fq.gz` and `clean.2.fq.gz`).

#### 4.2 Example
`python3 MitoZ.py assemble --genetic_code 5 --clade Arthropoda --outprefix test \
--thread_number 8 \
--fastq1 clean.1.fq.gz \
--fastq2 clean.2.fq.gz \
--fastq_read_length 150 \
--insert_size 250 \
--run_mode 2 \
--filter_taxa_method 1 \
--requiring_taxa 'Arthropoda'`


### 5 findmitoscaf

`findmitoscaf` is to search for the mitochondrial sequences from fasta file which contains non-mitochondrial sequences. Output is a mitochondrial sequence file in fasta format.

#### 5.1 Input files
* `totoal_assembly.fa`
A file contains non-mitochondrial sequences.

If `totoal_assembly.fa` is generated by `SOAPdenovo-Trans-127mer`, you can specify the option `--from_soaptrans`, and in this case, `totoal_assembly.fa` is the only input file you need.

Otherwise, you still need following two files as input,

* `clean.1.fq.gz` and `clean.2.fq.gz`


#### 5.2 Example
`python3 MitoZ.py findmitoscaf --genetic_code 5 --clade Arthropoda --outprefix test \
--thread_number 8 \
--from_soaptrans \
--fastafile totoal_assembly.fa`

Or,
`python3 MitoZ.py findmitoscaf --genetic_code 5 --clade Arthropoda \
--outprefix test --thread_number 8 \
--fastq1 clean.1.fq.gz \
--fastq2 clean.2.fq.gz \
--fastq_read_length 150 \
--fastafile totoal_assembly.fa`

If you want to see the abundance along the mitogenome sequences, you will also need to set `--fastq1` and `--fastq2`.

### 6 annotate

`annotate` is to annotate the input mitogenome sequence, including protein coding genes (PCGs), tRNA genes and rRNA genes. Output is a genbank file containing mitochondrial genome sequences and annotation information.

#### 6.1 Input files
e.g. `mitogenome.fa`

A fasta file containing the mitochondrial seqeunces.

#### 6.2 Example
`python3 MitoZ.py annotate --genetic_code 5 --clade Arthropoda --outprefix test --thread_number 8 --fastafile mitogenome.fa`


### 7. visualize

`visualize` module is to visualize the genbank file.

#### 7.1 Input files
e.g. `mitogenome.gb`

A Genbank file.

#### 7.1 Example
`python3 MitoZ.py visualize --gb mitogenome.gb`

If you want to show sequencing depth along the mitogenome, you need to set `--fastq1` and `--fastq2` and `--depth`.


## Result files

The result files should be in `outprefix.result` directory.

`work*.scafSeq` is the assembly file output by SOAPdenovo-Trans.

`*_mitoscaf.fa.fsa` is the mitogenome in fasta format.

`*_mitoscaf.fa.gbf` is the mitogenome in Genbank format.

`*_mitoscaf.fa.val` and `errorsummary.val` are output by tbl2asn, you should check if there are annotation problems.

`*.statistic`: how many PCGs, rRNA genes, and tRNA genes have been annotated for each sequence.


`visualization` (and `visualization.SeqCut`) contains files of visualized mitogenome in svg and png format.


## Multi-Kmer mode
when there missing PCGs after you run MitoZ in quick mode (`--run_mode 2`), you can try with the multi-Kmer mode (`--run_mode 3`).

You should provide the quick mode assembly as input, including files:

1. `work71.hmmout.fa`, or a file (e.g. `quickMode.fa`) which you convince containing the correct mitogenome sequences for you sample. And manually create a file (e.g. `quick_mode_fa_genes.txt`) describing what PCG genes on each sequence, format:

    seqid1 PCG1 PCG2
    seqid2 PCG3

2. `work71.hmmtblout.besthit.sim.filtered.fa`

3. `work71.hmmtblout.besthit.sim.filtered.high_abundance_*X.reformat.sorted`

in the directory of `outprefix.assembly`.


#### 2.2 Example
`python3 MitoZ.py all2 --genetic_code 5 --clade Arthropoda --outprefix test \
--thread_number 12 --fastq1 clean.1.fq.gz --fastq2 clean.2.fq.gz \
--fastq_read_length 150 --insert_size 250 \
--run_mode 3 \
--filter_taxa_method 1 \
--requiring_taxa 'Arthropoda' \
--quick_mode_seq_file quickMode.fa \
--quick_mode_fa_genes_file quick_mode_fa_genes.txt  \
--missing_PCGs ND4L ND6 ND2 \
--quick_mode_score_file work71.hmmtblout.besthit.sim.filtered.high_abundance_10.0X.reformat.sorted  \
--quick_mode_prior_seq_file work71.hmmtblout.besthit.sim.filtered.fa`

The result file is `outprefix.multiKmer_seq_picked.clean.fa` under directory `outprefix.assembly2`.


## Citation

    Guanliang Meng, Yiyuan Li, Chentao Yang, Shanlin Liu. MitoZ: A toolkit for mitochondrial genome assembly, annotation and visualization

